---
title: "A syntactic approach to the directed semantics of programs"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/thesis
date: 2023-12-08
venue: ''
paperurl: 'https://hal.science/tel-04610758v1'
citation: 'A syntactic approach to the directed semantics of programs. Aly-Bora Ulusoy'
---
Verification of critical systems’ programs is crucial to ensure they perform designated tasks accurately. Concurrent programs, operating in parallel with shared memory access, present unique challenges. Locks are used to prevent non-deterministic behavior, but this can lead to deadlocks in critical systems. To study these programs, one must verify all possible executions, which becomes exponentially complex. We are interested in a recent model where programs are represented by topological spaces, equipped with a notion of direction corresponding to program execution. In these models, determining the commutation of actions is equivalent to determining homotopy equivalence classes. This perspective introduces new deadlock detection algorithms, as well as an efficient representation of these spaces using sets of maximal cubes. The deadlock detection algorithms in topological models and the efficient representation of the authorized region by cubes do not result from the topological approach but only from the underlying directed structure. This is why we introduce a new syntactic model of programs in which we re-implement the representations and algorithms of the topological approach. This approach offers much more readily usable and implementable results, even in the case of programs with loops, where we provide a new algorithm for detecting doomed states. We also provide new tools for factorization of programs through an extension of Hashimoto’s theorem to the case of loop-free categories, which is a natural setting for many topological invariants in the directed semantics of programs.

[Download paper here](http://jichiultimati.github.io/files/phd.pdf)
